Offering the Flowers of Remembered Kindness

In Praise of the Gracious Teacher, Khen Rinpoche Kunpal

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Homage to the guru and the protector Mañjughoṣa!

From the outset you attained a form of utter peace,Yet, out of love for those of us in this
present age,You appeared as a guide to the supreme vehicle.Peerless guru, great khenpo, to
you I offer praise.

Prior to this life, you manifested as not just oneLearned and accomplished master but several.You
took birth in the Water Monkey[1] on the banks of the Dachu[2] in Kham,And awakened
your sublime potential—to you I offer praise.

Jigme Chökyi Wangpo accepted and guided you.Caring for you like his own son and instructing
you wellIn all the forms of conduct to be adopted and avoided.Youthful moon, heir to the victors,
to you I offer praise.

You easily mastered reading, writing and grammar,And within the great bodhisattva’s divine hearing,Each
day you recited practice texts, praises, songs,And chapters, much to his delight—to
you I offer praise.

To the assembled saṅgha you gave an outstanding explanationOf the aspiration prayer for attaining
the realm of great blissAnd brought supreme joy and amazement to the intelligent.To
you whom the supreme guide and guru encouraged, I offer praise.

From the great bodhisattva, who was Śāntideva in person,For six months[3] you received instruction
on the BodhicaryāvatāraAnd took marvellous notes on his excellent teachings,So vast
and profound—to you I offer praise.

From Yönten Gyatso, a tenth-bhūmi bodhisattva,You took ordination, a saffron emblem of victory,And
adorned the Sage’s teachings with your oceanic discipline,Untainted by downfalls, natural
or proscribed—to you I offer praise.

With Tendzin Norbu, lord among scholars,You studied several works of the vehicle of characteristics,Eliminating
misconceptions through study and contemplation,And ascended to the kingdom
of erudition—to you I offer praise.

From Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo,Chökyi Dorje, Tenpai Nyima,Dechen Dorje, the one named Pema,[4]
and others,You received empowerments and instructions, especially those of the Heart-Essence—to
you I offer praise.

From the lord of siddhas, Chakong,[5] an emanation of Düdul,You received empowerments and instructions
from his own treasures and on Dzogchen, and the like.To you whose realization was
enhanced and who received clear propheciesOf what would happen in the future, I offer praise.


You relied especially on Jamyang Mipham Choklé Namgyal,With whom you had a special connection
from former lives.He taught profound, difficult points of the Middle Way and Pramāṇa,And
you became his supreme heart-son—to you I offer praise.

In the dharma centre of Katok Dorje Den,Counterpart of Magadha in the land of Āryas,You had
an utterly clear sense of having been bornAs Śākya Dorje in a previous life—to you I offer
praise.

From Situ Paṇḍita, the omniscient one in person,You received an ocean of secret mantra teachings,
both Sarma and Nyingma.Your minds merged as one, and you also taught sūtra and mantra.To
you who produced so many learned disciples, I offer praise.

At the great dharma centre of Tennyi Dargye Ling,You compiled the excellent works of Pema Vijaya,[6]
crown ornament of the learned and accomplished,And those of Mipham, lord of Dharma.To
you who contributed to the profound and vast ways of Dharma, I offer praise.

In the Garden of Immortality, the private residenceAt Tashi Lhatsé,[7] which is just like a
second Akaniṣṭha,You taught the community the BodhicaryāvatāraAnd Pramāṇavārttika—to you I
offer praise.

At Evaṃ Tarpa Tsé, in the great khenpo’s residenceAnd the omniscient one’s quarters you twice
turned the Dharma Wheel,Imparting the definitive secrets of the great Kālacakra commentary.To
you who fulfilled the profound intent of Jampal Gyepa, I offer praise.

You did not neglect the sayings of your own teachers,Or misapply the words of Indian and Tibetan
commentaries.To you who taught without error or confusion,Precisely according to the
sayings and assertions of past scholars, I offer praise.

However much the critical might investigate and inquire,Still they could not plumb the depths
of your intelligence.To you whose responses instilled confidence in thoseWith the four reliances
and four modes of reasoning, I offer praise.

You spoke honestly, without any pretension or deception,Adopting a śrāvaka’s pure, wholesome
conduct externally,While inwardly you never parted from the profound practiceOf generation,
perfection, and Great Perfection—to you I offer praise.

As a sign of proficiency, your wisdom born of meditation blazed.There are very few today who
have done as much as youTo uphold the view of the Ngagyur Nyingma tradition.To you who deserve
the epithet 'third Longchen Rabjam',[8] I offer praise.

For the two supreme Dodrup incarnations[9] and other fortunate ones,You turned the Dharma Wheel
of the Heart-Essence,And increased the vitality of the teachings.To you who brought boundless
benefit to beings, I offer praise.

At a time when the Nyingma teachings had been tainted,You alone were like a ketaka jewel that
purifies water,Commenting precisely according to Lama Mipham’s intent.To you who showed
the Middle Way beyond the extremes of eternalism and nihilism, I bow.

In your profound commentary to the Beacon of Certainty,And other texts you commented according
to the guru’s intent,And through numerous well-formulated compositions,Revived the dying
embers of the Early Translation teachings—to you I offer praise.

Guiding others along the path of authentic reasoning,You appeared like Dharmakīrti for this
degenerate age,Kunzang Palden, victorious over all,Great lion of speech, to you I devotedly
offer praise.

Until the vase of your nirmāṇakāya dissolvedDuring your seventy-second year, in the Water Sheep,[10]You
constantly applied yourself to profound meditationAnd taught sūtra and mantra
day and night—to you I offer praise.

O glorious and gracious guru,Even an ox such as I, when recalling howYou kindly inspired an
inclination towards study,Can only shed tears of anguished longing.

May you, the lord who showed me such exceptional care,Remain without ever parting in the centre
of my heart,And help me to master bodhicitta, realize the genuine nature,And spontaneously
accomplish my own and others’ aims.

Thus, Lodrö Gyatso, the ragged lama who was sustained by this supreme protector’s immeasurable
kindness wrote this in Gangtok, Sikkim, while remembering the guru. May it become a cause
for the swift infusion of his blessings.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.